---
layout: page
title: About
---

This is my blog, it does not have a name, most likely never will.
I was told I should have one of these, I was also
told it stands for "I ramble on about things that nobody cares about",
or maybe "web log", or maybe it is now a word that does not stand for
anything.

Mostly I wanted a place to express my opinions and thoughts about
software engineering and such.

Who am I?
---------

A husband, a father, a former rock climber, a former cross-fitter.
This blog will likely deal mostly with my software development
interests, so for those purposes:  a software engineering manager by
trade.  A sofware engineer by training and inclination.  I currently
work for one of those large web companies, leading a few DevOps-like
teams.  I used to work in high-frequency leading a few software
engineering and Ops teams.  I have a PhD in computer engineering, in
the area of distributed real-time systems (yes, they do exist), a
masters in computer science, and a bachellors in math.

I have been coding since 1985, and programming professionally (as in
my main source of income) since the early 90's.  My main programming
language is C++ since I think 1989, but I have done C, Fortran,
Assembly, Perl, Python, Ruby, Shell, R, K, SQL and many other
languages (yep, Java was not on that list, obviously I have read and
written a little Java, too small to count).  My main platform is Linux
these days, but I have used Solaris, VxWorks, LynxOS, HP-UX, Irix,
Domain/OS, Windows NT, Windows CE, DOS, and probably others that I
forget.

I have coded on almost anything from 8-bit microprocessors to massive
clusters, though not done much parallel programming until a year ago
when I picked up OpenCL.

I have been known to craft a webpage or two, but they do not look
nice.  I have been known to write a user interface or two, but the
last time was on X11/Motif, and (you can laugh) most of the graphics
were plain Xlib, with some OpenGL dropped in later.  That is to say, I
have been mostly building and leading teams that build "infrastructure
software" of some kind or another.  Low level stuff that when it
breaks, the whole company stops.

Thanks for reading!

PS: You got all the way here?  Color me impressed.
